---
title: Dimension Reduction - Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
author:
  name: Pierre Lague & Ilian VANDENBERGHE
  link: 
date: 2024-03-04 09:45:00 +0800
categories: [Studies, U-Lille, Python]
tags: [Python, ML]
math: true
mermaid: true
image:
  src: '/assets/posts/umap/header.png'
  width: 800
  height: 600
---



# Project: UMAP vs t-SNE 📊

## Overview:
This project compares Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) with t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) for dimension reduction tasks. UMAP, a formidable competitor to t-SNE, excels in preserving both local and global structure in high-dimensional data.

## How UMAP Works:
UMAP constructs a fuzzy topological representation, optimizing an objective function to balance local and global structure preservation. It achieves this through graph construction and embedding techniques.

## Testing and Comparison:
We'll test UMAP and t-SNE on diverse datasets, evaluating visualization quality, structure preservation, and computational efficiency. The comparison aims to highlight each algorithm's strengths and weaknesses across different data types.

## Impact of Parameters:
Exploring parameters like number of neighbors and distance metrics, we'll assess their impact on UMAP's performance.

<html>
  <body>
    <iframe src="/assets/posts/umap/PROJET_RD_UMAP_FINAL.pdf" width="100%" height="800px">
    </iframe>
  </body>
</html>


## Contributing 🤝

Contributions are highly encouraged! If you have suggestions, improvements, or feature requests, feel free to reach out to me !

## License 📝

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Developed by Pierre LAGUE and Ilian VANDENBERGHE at the University of Lille, France. 🚀📊
